Hi, this is Scott. I
really appreciate our sponsors because
they make the show possible.
Today's show is sponsored by
developer express, become a UI
superhero with dev express controls
and libraries. Deliver elegant.net solutions
that address customer needs today
by leveraging your existing knowledge,
you can build next generation
touch enabled solutions for tomorrow,
you can download your free
30 day trial@dxdothanselminutes.com. That's dx.hanselminutes.com.
. Hi, this is Scott
Hanselman. This is another episode
of Hansel minutes today. I'm
talking with Jeremy Miller. How are
you sir? Doing well? How
about yourself? I am lovely.
We've known each other for
many years. I want to
say 15, at least 10,
10 a long time. You've
been in the dotnet community
for a long time. You've
been in other open source
communities. You've been creating open
source. Gosh, as long as
anybody I know in our
community. And I know recently
you released storyteller 4.0, which
was a long running project
that you had for doing
human readable executable specifications in
dotnet. So congratulations on storyteller
four point. Oh, thank you.
I understand though, that you
are trying something else out.
You've got another new open
source project that you're helping
out with. Well, so it's
a couple of years in,
but we have, and we
have a pretty nice community
around it. Working on a
project called Martin with a,
with an E named after
the little weasel, like animal
that allows dotnet developers to
treat the Postgres QL database
as a document data store
and an event store as
well. Interesting. Okay. So let's
parse that out a little
bit. Postgres right now has
a lot of people excited.
Why, what is it about
Postgres SQL that has people
talking well? So it was
hard to beat the it's
hard to beat the free
and open source model, but
a Postgres comes with a
lot of, I would say,
unusual features that you don't
necessarily see. And a lot
of other databases for us,
it was the very strong
Jason and, and the binary,
Jason data types and data
operators being able to run
JavaScript inside the database. Other
people like it for the,
for the geo API guys
and a lot of other
strange things. So with one
database engine, you can be
using PostgreSQL as, you know,
regular relational database. You can
be using as a key
value store. You can be
doing Jason, making a document
database all with one installation.
Yeah, It's a, it feels
like even it's like the,
a overnight success in, in,
in 10 or 20 years.
Like I remember a couple
of years back looking at
Postgres and maybe finding it
a little bit wanting. And
I know a lot of
people have looked at Postgres
and compared it to SQL
server, and you've got, you
know, SQL server, this kind
of big, a closed source
product that people pay money
for. And, and the Postgres
is just chugging along. And
I feel like in the
last year or two people
have been like, wow, you
can really possibly replace SQL
servers with Postgres and tickets
in directions, SQL server. Won't
go. I, and that's what
it was for us. We're
traditionally a SQL server shop
and people use it more
than not, but any place
where we want to go,
we'd rather use a document
database where we're going down
the path of using Postgres
now. So you're totally happy
with Postgres, but what is
Martin on top of that?
Why can't I just use
any RM and throw it
on top of Postgres and
keep going? Well, you absolutely
can. Entity framework targets Postgres.
So you're, you're off and
running with that. What a
document database does is it
allows you to just take
an object and really in
this case, we're just serializing
it to Jason and sticking
it directly into the database.
So it gives you the
ability to almost be schemeless
except your schema just reflects
whatever your objects are. So
you don't spend a lot
of time working on ORM
mappings. You don't have to
wrestle with stuff like table
per table, per subclass, or
polymorphism, or a whole, any
other issue you hit trying
to use a heavy RM
like Eddy framework and hibernate
with Martin, change your object.
And it just works as
long as it's Sarah analyzable.
So let me try to
understand this a little bit,
and I'll ask a couple
of ignorant questions. So Postgres,
and again, I might be
wrong, but so correct me.
It's not an object database,
is it, is it intended
to be it's an it's
a relationship? No, it's not.
We're, we're very heavily utilizing
and kind of hijacking their
Jaison support. So they have
a slightly different type of
Jason type called Jason B
for binary, Jason. So you're
storing an already parsed out
document structure in the database.
So it's pretty, pretty efficient
to query against that and
even pull out and do
things like, like select transforms.
So that that's what enables
us to even put a
link provider on top of
Postgres, where all your data
is really being stored as
Jason blobs. If you are
taking Postgres and hijacking or
piggybacking on top of some
feature that they have in
order to it into a
document database, at what point
during this development of this,
this a product, are you
thinking maybe I'm pushing this
database in a way that
it's not meant to be
used or just generally using
it in a way it's
not meant to be used.
And when does it go
from proof of concept to
like, wow, we can actually
do this. Well, I would,
I would argue that we're
there and we'd better be
there because my shop has
Martin in production and in
our biggest applications so Long
to figure that out or
do we, like, it seems,
it almost seems like, let's
see if this works. I'm
like, wow, this actually, yeah.
So it took about nine
months from inception to starting
to use it on our
projects. And I think, I
think some other people in
the Martin community were using
it in production. Well, before
we were. So it took
just a couple months to
get the proof of concept,
being able to load and
load and save document types.
It's taking two years and
counting to build up a
kind of a Crete enough
link support to be useful.
And I'm really some of
our biggest challenges haven't necessarily
been the link or the
basic documents. It's things you
wouldn't necessarily expect. Schema migrations,
just places where Jason versus
the.net type system doesn't play
too nice. Okay. So let's,
let's reset to zero and
think about this for people
who maybe haven't even worked
with a document database before,
if I've got a customer
object and it's got all
kinds of things like first
name and last name and
address and whatnot. Typically I'm
going to spread that across
a bunch of different tables,
and I'm going to have
to maintain that fidelity or
lack of fidelity between how
the database decides to store
that object as it gets
broken apart. And how I
like to think about it
as a.net person and the
document database world. The ideal
is just that I have
a customer database and I
throw it at an end
point and it serializes. And
I bring it back. If
I'm serializing it as Jason,
then I have to deal
with, like you just said,
the, the fidelity or lack
of fidelity as you serialize
C-sharp to Jason, isn't that
a solved problem? Don't don't
we aren't, we able to
have full fidelity back and
forth between Jason and poco
or plain old CLR objects.
You, it, and some of
it depends on how far
you really want to customize
your Newton's off settings. But
yeah, as long as your
object is completely serialized, double
it, that might make you,
cause you to relax some
of the, the scoping rules,
but maybe not. So yes,
the, the database, what store
do the database just reflects
your objects? Okay. So if
I'm oversimplifying this, someone says
I'm going to go from
a table called customer with
10 columns, and now I'm
going to have a table
called customer, and I'm just
going to have a blob
and I'm going to throw
Jason in there. They're going
to think, well, now the
database can't introspect into that,
can't see into that can't
index last name. How does
that work? Okay, so let's,
let's talk about that one.
So all of that is
actually possible. It is possible
to search within the, the
Jaison blob, but especially if
you're using the Jason B
type in Postgres, it's quite
a bit more efficient beyond
that. So Martin gives you
a couple, couple of capabilities
for indexing. If you really
want to, the older option
we did originally is you
can have something called, we
call it duplicated field. So
you can designate a property
or field as I want
a separate column for this,
that duplicates the data of
the Jason B. And then
I'm going to index that.
And the link support is
smart enough to opt into
that as it needs, needs
to. But one of the
cool Postgres specific features, I
don't know of existing in
any other database, we can
create a calculated indexes on
Jason B expressions. So we
have a syntax in Martin
when you're configuring, this is,
this is what are my
storage to be. So say
it's a, it's a customer,
a customer class, and it
has a blast name property.
So you could use a
little link expression to say,
I want to index on
X dot last name and
have a type safe way
of expressing. I want an
index on this because that's
what I'm searching, searching for
behind the scenes, Martins tackling
the Postgres specific syntax and
creating a database, a index
for you. Oh, okay. So
Postgres had the ability to
put Jason in it for
a while. And then with,
with 9.2, they kind of
made it more native and
then 9.4 allowed you to
put binary Jason. So just
to be clear, it's what
people understand. You're not just
sticking a string of Jason
in there. You're you may
be sending that to Postgres,
but it is storing it
in a Jason B or
binary format, which, you know,
strips out the white space
and packs it up. Right,
Exactly. And on top of
that, if you, if you
get in a situation where
you need to do a
lot of ad hoc, querying
like user, user supplied, querying,
or something, where you have
a lot of options, there's
another index type that some
of our users use gin
index. And I don't remember
what it stands for, but
it creates a more generic
index all the way across
the Jason document. They'll slow
down your inserts and your
rights, but it'll speed up
your reads if you're doing
a lot of querying. And
that, that is G I
N yes. Okay. So these,
these gin index and this,
the ability to do this
makes that a little bit
slow, like you said, because
it's an inverted index, but
it makes things faster to
query. Yeah. Slow writes, but
faster reads so that you've
got some tools, you've got
some traditional database like tools
to optimize your storage to
what you need. Okay. So
once you've used these, these
gin indexes, and you can
start a gen means generalized
inverted index turns out, then
you can query within that
data. So typically in you're
writing the SQL manually, if
you're talking directly to the
database, so you'll do, you
know, select star from and
all that kind of stuff,
except you can use Jason
operators to dig into that.
How does Martin express or
project into those more Jason
specific queries? Okay. So this,
this was a little bit
unpleasant. So you do have
an option. You can just
feed it, feed it, basically
a where clause yourself, if,
if you need to do
something special, but otherwise we
have a custom link link
provider as part of Martin
that doesn't cover every possible
use case because you never
do, but it reads your,
your normal link where expressions
and select expressions and order
by and all that goodness.
And behind the scenes that
turns into the Postgres Jason
operators. And that's, if you're,
if you're dear listener, if
you're listening to this and
you think I, I want
to do a library like
this for myself. That's, that's
one of the hardest parts
of doing something like Martin
was translating from dotnet expressions
to the Postgres operators. Well,
there is a.net project called
NPG sql.net access to Postgres.
What does Martin sit on
top of and, and how
many layers are there? So
Martin sits on just like
you said, Martin sits on
MPG SQL. So that's your
ado.net provider for.net. So we
sit on top of that.
There's a small utility library
called baseline to the normal
junk drawer of extension methods
and not many other things.
Does he use a TPL
data flow for some of
the events store? So this
isn't a massive stack that
someone is going to necessarily
have to feel like they're
buying into. It's really a
very tight, a tight layer.
It's almost meant to be
all one thing. You're going
to think about post. You're
going to start to think
about Postgres as a real
document database and maybe even
an event store. Yes. So
we felt originally while my
shop thought that we had
a usage for the event
store and we had several
years ago, we'd done a
spike on using Postgres to
the event store. So we
threw it in there and
other people from the Martin
community have picked it up
and used it much more
than I have. But so
we have an event store
the Jason B type. Again,
it's a very convenient way
to store the events, but
pinned only the big thing,
Martin ads there on top
of that is we have
built in projections. So you
can define how, how I
take in events. And then
how that turns into a
REIT side read side views,
where the read side views
are just Martin documents. So
say you have a, some
kind of invoicing event store,
you know, getting things like
invoice created, invoice, approved, whatever
it's going to be. The
events come streaming in. And
as the events are coming,
coming in, you've got a
couple different hooks. You can
create projections that will store
either synchronously or, or off
to the side. A read
side view of this is
exactly what the invoice is
by kind of compiling all,
all the events. Maybe you
could say a little something
about event sourcing for people
who aren't familiar with it.
Sure, sure, sure. Sorry. So
at least, at least as
I was growing up doing
software development, you had a
single model where you wrote
to the database, maybe it's
this domain model in your
system where you might've had
an invoice class and as
operations come in, you would
modify that invoice object and
persist it back down. So
you always had the current
view and that's really all
you had. Maybe you had
some, some extra auditing stuff
behind the scenes with event
store. The first class citizen
on rights is you bring
in the events themselves. So
instead of modeling a big
invoice domain model object, you
take in a little, little
events that model things like
the invoice was created on
this date. We added a
line item at this time.
So it comes in sequentially
and it also comes in
with probably some kind of
timestamp. So the challenge from
doing that is how do
I through the application, how
do I present to users
or make judgements on what
is the current state of
the whole workflow? That's where
the projection side comes in.
And with Martin the, on
the positive note, the kinds
of things you can do,
and Martin does support some
of this too, by having
the timestamped events, you can
start to do things. See
what was the state of
the world at five days
ago? So you can replay
the events from the beginning
to five days ago. So
the first, the first project
I used event sourcing on
it was a system where
we were trying to optimize
the workflow of anesthesiologists in
a, in an operating room.
So tracking events of, you
know, when was the doctor
present? When was the room
open? When did the patient
get there? We could do
some temporal acquiring and say,
what did the, the status
of the operating room look
like at, at noon and
then 1:00 PM and play that
forward and backwards to try
to find out where did
things go wrong? Where did
things go off? Okay. So
the, the idea, if I
understand correctly, then that the
idea of event sourcing is
that when some change of
state happens, that changes States
captured in an event object,
and then you store those
objects and then you can
store them in, in sequence
so that you can, as
you just said, go back
and forward in time and,
and capture the, the state
of the system at any
moment. Exactly. So, I mean,
one of the ways I
think about it, I, for
our shop, I would try
to recommend event sourcing anywhere
where you have a complicated
workflow, but any place where
you need to have historical
query or maybe auditing of,
you know, how long did
it, did we go from
an invoice being created to
being approved? That's a very
good fit for event sourcing.
Okay. So can I use
event sourcing features of Martin
and Postgres at the same
time as I'm doing the
object and document database? Yes,
they, it's pretty seamless. So
when you're doing event capture,
the, you can be at
the same time, you can
be modifying or creating all
new documents while you're capturing
events and do that all
within the same unit of
work. So it all comes
in in the same transaction.
The projected views that Martin
creates from your events can
be stored as just plain
Martin documents. So your read
side view and your, your
events store would come with
all the same querying and
link querying support that any
other Martin document has. So
you've mentioned at the beginning
and throughout that, there's this
there's linked support. And I
commented that there's Jason and
Jason B operators that are
very Jason specific for pulling
Jason out, or introspecting into
Jason. That's living in a
column. Is, is there, are
there link extensions that you've
made that are very Jason
specific or are you forced
to pass in? Like you,
you're going link, link, link,
link link until you finally
like run out of the
link, the link minus of
it. And then you have
to like pass in a
string and you have to
know Postgres stuff. And unfortunately
that's, that's pretty well exactly
it, the link support it.
So if using a data
access tool today, and you
really like the link support
in it, just send a
silent thanks to whatever team
that wrote that because it's,
it's absurdly laborious, isn't it?
So when you hit limits,
we've got a couple options.
You can go down to
straight sequel, which, which is,
it's not a super friendly
place. I think the Postgres,
Jason operators are walking, going
farther. We haven't done this
yet, but there's a couple
other options. So because it
is just Newton soft, what
you can do is have
a read only a property,
a calculated property on your,
your document object that evaluates
whatever crazy expression it is
that you want to check.
Like I want to re
reach into property a property
B and then check a
list on that and make
sure that the first value
is this. So an option
is to make a calculated
field on your, on your
document class, specifically to just
to make it easier for
Martin to search by. And
then in future future, it's
been a planned, a feature
forever that nobody's gotten around
to is we do have
some ability to run JavaScript
in, in Postgres. So what
I'd like to do is
add an extension where you
can basically use JavaScript functions
to do the Boolean test.
And it's even, even again,
going a little bit farther,
it would be possible to
put indexes Postgres indexes against
that, that JavaScript, so that
I'm hoping kind of becomes
the end around of if
you have something that's just
too weird for the link
support like it or not.
Everybody pretty well knows Java
script. So let's just write
Java, a JavaScript function that
can interrogate the Jason document
and do it in a
way where all you have
to do is write a
single file that just has
the Jaison function that takes
in a takes in an
object and returns or a
couple of arguments and returns
of bullying. So Martin will
do the extra work of
wrapping it up in puss
crests, the eight, a store
procedure support, and all the
ugly stuff for you At
a simplistic level, there was
a time and a lot
of people move and recognize
this when you're working with
a relational and you ask
it some question that went
from being a really fast
and easy question to ask,
to being a table scan,
and then, you know, doing
something a million times becomes
a problem in the process
of using Martin against Postgres.
How do I prevent asking
it, how do I prevent
from keep myself from asking
it a question that would
cause it to have to
run through and look at
all of the Jason and
calculated in decent, realize it
and think about it kind
of suddenly become CPU bound
and not really utilize the
database. Sure. So that, that
is a good question. So
you have, it is a
full database and you can
do things like use the
explained plan tooling. What I
would really say is at
that point, you need to,
you just need to be
testing your app and see
how it performs. But with
Martin, we have a little
utility in Martin to, you
know, test out whatever link
link expression you're using. And
there's an extension method. That'll
get you to the database
explained plan. So if you're
good enough for familiar with
that kind of verbiage, that
can tell you, Hey, you
got a table scan going
on here and probably wouldn't
be that different than normal
normal database usage. Okay. So
then that means that as
someone who might not be
familiar with Postgres, or might
not be familiar with document
databases, but I am familiar
with regular kind of traditional
databases, it should feel pretty
comfortable in my intuition about
how things work isn't completely
off. Yeah. Even still have
the traditional tools that would
be, that would be telling
you, Hey, you're doing a
table scan here on a
big set of data Right
now, Martin, on the, on
the website, the main website
for it says a polyglot
persistence for dotnet systems. What
is the, what do you
mean by polyglot in the
context of you're saying it's
a.net system? What does that
mean? Polyglot persistence. Well, just
from the standpoint of what,
what persistent strategies do you
want to use? So I
can use Martin Martin for
the document database side. I
can use Martin for events
sourcing. So there's, there's already
two patterns of persistence. It's
perfectly possible to use dapper
with Martin, even to some
degree to use used dapper
writes in the same unit
of work as Martin. So
now you have a micro
ORM as well. And at
the same token, you can
use it as a pure
relational database, so that that's
got a lot of things
covered. I haven't used it,
but there's, there's also a
capability of using Postgres as
a key value store. So
one database with, or without
the Martin Martin library, and
you have several different, very
different patterns of, of application
persistence at your fingertips. Very
cool. If I'm, if I'm
not comfortable, I'm comfortable with.net.
And I like the idea
of a document database, but
maybe I'm not comfortable with
Postgres Postgres, something that I
can just install and not
think about. Or can I
use Postgres as a service
in Azure and sit, you
know, Martin on top? So
both. So what I would
say is Postgres is Postgres
is very easy to install.
It's if you're on, if
you're on Mac brew, we'll
brew, install Postgres, we'll put
it on fast. The windows
installation's pretty easy. I haven't
tried it with chocolatey, but
it's gotta be there as
you're just added official Postgres
support there with, I gotta
throw a little caveat out
that if you use the
Azure Azure Postgres support, some
Martin has an a, the
two O version. Very recently,
we have a way to
disable the requirement for JavaScript
on the database and you'll
need that temporarily until Azure
adds JavaScript support to Postgres,
but excellent. Some, I think
a good chunk of our
community, quite a few of
them seem to run Martin
applications on AWS and then
a lot our, our and
my own shop are interested
on in hosting modernized applications
in Azure. Okay. So it's
nondenominational works everywhere. Well, anywhere
where you have Postgres. Yeah,
indeed. And it's pretty mature.
Now you've been thinking about
this since kind of 2005,
and you're on Martin 2.0
right now, how big is
the team? Well, I would
say, I mean, I'm still
the primary contributor. We have
probably four or five people
that are, that are handling
questions and, and bug fixes
and little features. And then
beyond that, probably another 20
that provide a lot of
feedback. And I mean, we'll
say from a community standpoint,
this is probably the best
OSS experience I've ever had
for people jumping in and
contributing. We get people that
help with documentation we've had
help with. And this is
actually a big deal. People
when they have problems with
Martin are they'll send a
pull request with a, with
a failing test that demonstrates
the problem. And that that's
been huge. I know for
myself being able to, to
keep up with things. So
it's been a great community
for that. It's probably the
best, like I said, it's
probably the best OSS experience
I've ever had. How big
is it? What is the
biggest, most like intense usage
of Martin? Is it yours?
Or some of you found
someone in the wild that's
going, going beyond what you
expected. So We don't necessarily,
we don't necessarily push a
lot of the advanced features
or self it's, something that
we want to want to
get to. There, there are
plenty of other shops that
use special use the event
store pretty hard, even doing
some event processing off of
that. Yeah. Pushing features. So
we have a compiled query
feature. So hopefully everybody who
uses link should probably know
that the exercise of parsing
a link query is actually
pretty expensive before you even
get near the database. Just
the act of going from
here's a link expression turned
into a SQL command. So
we have what we call
a compiled query that kind
of lets you stash off
and only express a link
expression that you're using the
lot only parse at once
and completely remember everything there
is to do to get
it there. So that's been
a huge challenge. People using
a lot of combinations of
things like soft delete, or
we have, multitenancy now hierarchical
storage using that in combination
with that compiled query feature,
that's where the link supports
a little bit different. That's
the part where people really
pushed on it. Very cool.
So people can go and
Google for Martin, M a
R T E N. And
this is part of the
Jasper FX or the Jasper
framework on, on get hub.
It's got as with all
of your projects, really impressive
documentation. It's really well organized.
It's really easy to get
started and people should check
that out right away. It's
a, it's surprisingly easy to
set up call. So fantastic.
Thanks so much for spending
time with me today. Thanks
for having me on this
has been another episode of
Hanselminutes and we'll see you
again next week.